Adds proposal for auto partitioning in LSO (#486)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/local-storage/automatic-partition.md

## Proposal

The `local-storage-operator` is already capable of detecting local disks from the nodes and provisioning PVs out of them, but it can't partition them.
The idea is to introduce the feature of partitioning the local disks and using the partitions to provision the PVs.

The administrator can specify if he wants to partition the disks in the LocalVolumeSet CR and then LSO, after detecting the disk, will partition them first before provisioning PVs on those partitions.

### Workflow for Local PV creation via `LocalVolumeSet CR`
- The admin decides they want to create partitions on some devices in the cluster
- He creates a LocalVolumeSet CR that includes the partitioning policy
- Once the `LocalVolumeSet` is created, LSO reconciles the LocalVolumeSet CR (the same as designed for full device),
- The controller will:
  - configure the local-static-provisioner to make a new StorageClass based on certain directories on the selected nodes.
  - assign diskmaker daemonset to the selected nodes.
  - there will be one daemonset for each `LocalVolumeSet` CR.

> - The diskmaker daemon will find devices that match the disovery policy and check if partitoningSpec is present

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The diskmaker daemon will find devices that match the discovery policy and check if partitoningSpec is present
```

  - if partitonSpec is present, it will partition the devices.
  - as soon as a device is partitoned
    - the diskmaker will symlink the child partitions of the device into the directory that the local-static-provisioner is watching
    - The local-static-provisioner will provision PVs on those partitions
- The localVolumeset won't accept changes after its created and has a partitioningSpec

## Design Details for Auto partitioning of local devices

Updated `LocalVolumeSet` API sceme for Auto partition:

```go

type LocalVolumeSetSpec struct {
 ...
  // PartitioningSpec is the partitioning policy according to which the selected devices will be partitioned.
  PartitioningSpec PartitoiningSpec `json:"partitioningSpec"`
}

type PartitioningSpec struct {
  // PartSize determines the exact size of each partition.

>   PartSize *resource.Quantity `json:"partSize"`

Reviewer: I feel like we need to have a `Count` as well. It looks like a waste to use the entire device all the time.

Reviewer 2: If you're going to partition the disk, seems like you'd want to partition it all at the same time since the unpartitioned space wouldn't be usable. There could certainly be other options to indicate how partitions should be created, but I want to be clear about the scenarios to keep it simple.

Author: > If you're going to partition the disk, seems like you'd want to partition it all at the same time since the unpartitioned space wouldn't be usable. There could certainly be other options to indicate how partitions should be created, but I want to be clear about the scenarios to keep it simple.

I didn't understand by partition it all at the same time.
Do you suggest that we should not keep count for the current scenario?

Author: I am in favour of count as it is also a simple parameter to partition the disks.

Reviewer: I guess the rationale is why should we use the entire device? If we device is an NVMe it could certainly be used by other applications. I don't think we (can?) restrict disks just for Ceph.

So if we decide that Ceph needs 3 partitions of 40GiB (making this up) then the rest can still be used by other applications.

Author: > So if we decide that Ceph needs 3 partitions of 40GiB (making this up) then the rest can still be used by other applications.

I understand the point, but the scenario is not clear to me.
Is this in case of `count` or `size`?

Reviewer: Both.

Author: Got it.
So in case of `size` the user wants 30G partitions from a 100G disk.
We create 3 partitions of 30G and also create a partition for the remaining 10G right?
we can have an option that the user can select to partition the remaining space if he requires.

Reviewer 2: The result of the partitioning will be that we have a PV created on each partition. We don't know who the consumer is, it might be Ceph or it might be some other app, depending on who requests the volumes. So why wouldn't we partition the whole disk? If you're partitioning it for PVs, do we need to allow apps to use it for non-PVs? I didn't think so, but deciding not to partition the whole device can certainly be part of the policy.

Reviewer 2: For the parameters, is this the suggested policy in this thread? 
- If only `size` is specified, create partitions for the whole disk all of that size. If there is space remaining, create a PV for the remaining amount.
- If both `count` and `size` are specified, only create that number of partitions and leave the remaining disk unpartitioned.

That seems reasonable and simple to me.

Author: > For the parameters, is this the suggested policy in this thread?
> 
>     * If only `size` is specified, create partitions for the whole disk all of that size. If there is space remaining, create a PV for the remaining amount.
> 
>     * If both `count` and `size` are specified, only create that number of partitions and leave the remaining disk unpartitioned.
> 
My understanding of `count` is to create `count` no of partitions i.e., `Size of the entire device`/`count`
for example we have a device of total capacity of 128G and the value of `count` is 4, then 4 partitions of 32G each will be created.
> 
> That seems reasonable and simple to me.

Reviewer 2: Ah, I was stuck thinking about the size as being a required setting. What about this?
- If only `size` is specified, create partitions for the whole disk all of that size. If there is space remaining, create a PV for the remaining amount.
- If only `count` is specified, divide the disk up into that many partitions and calculate the size.
- If both `count` and `size` are specified, only create that number of partitions of the desired size and leave the remaining disk unpartitioned.

Author: Got it

  TotalProvisionedDeviceCount *int32 `json:"totalProvisionedDeviceCount,omitempty"`
  
  // observedGeneration is the last generation change the operator has dealt with
  // +optional
  ObservedGeneration int64 `json:"observedGeneration,omitempty"`
  
  // TotalProvisionedPartitionCount is the count of the total partitions over which the PVs has been provisioned
  // This will be diffrent for TotalProvisionedDeviceCount as TotalProvisionedDeviceCount is
  //the count of the actual devices
  TotalProvisionedPartitionCount *int32 `json:"totalProvisionedPartitionCount,omitempty"`
}
```

### Example of LocalVolumeSet CR:

```yaml
apiVersion: local.storage.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: LocalVolumeSet
metadata:
  name: example-autodetect
spec:
  nodeSelector:
    nodeSelectorTerms:
      - matchExpressions:
          - key: kubernetes.io/hostname
            operator: In
            values:
              - worker-0
              - worker-1
  storageClassName: example-storageclass
  volumeMode: Block
  maxDeviceCount: 10
  deviceInclusionSpec:
    deviceTypes:
      - RawDisk
    deviceMechanicalProperty:
      - Rotational
      - NonRotational

>     minSize: 10G

Reviewer: `minSize` must be >= `PartitioningSpec.Size`

>     maxSize: 100G

Reviewer: `maxSize ` must be <= `PartitioningSpec.Size`, good for an internal check.

Author: `maxSize` must be >= `PartitioningSpec.Size` right?

Reviewer: Right my bad!

 ...
  // PartitioningSpec is the partitioning policy according to which the selected devices will be partitioned.
  PartitioningSpec PartitoiningSpec `json:"partitioningSpec"`

  // Remaining fields in LocalVolumeSetStatus will be same as the implemented LocalVolumeSetSpec
}

type PartitioningSpec struct {
  // PartSize determines the exact size of each partition.
  PartSize *resource.Quantity `json:"partSize,omitempty"`
  Count    int64              `json:"count,omitempty"`
}

type LocalVolumeSetStatus struct {
  // TotalProvisionedDeviceCount is the count of the total devices over which the PVs has been provisioned
  TotalProvisionedDeviceCount *int32 `json:"totalProvisionedDeviceCount,omitempty"`

  // TotalProvisionedPartitionCount is the count of the total partitions over which the PVs has been provisioned
  // This will be diffrent for TotalProvisionedDeviceCount as TotalProvisionedDeviceCount is
  //the count of the actual devices
  TotalProvisionedPartitionCount *int32 `json:"totalProvisionedPartitionCount,omitempty"`

  // Remaining fields in LocalVolumeSetStatus will be same as the implemented LocalVolumeSetStatus
}
```

## Partitioning policy

> * Size: If only size is specified, create partitions for the whole disk all of that size. If there is space remaining, create a PV for the remaining amount.

Author: Do you mean if only `size` is specified then create partitions of desired size and leave the remaining disk unpartitioned?

> * Size: If only size is specified, create partitions for the whole disk all of that size. If there is space remaining, create a PV for the remaining amount.

Reviewer 3: Yes

---
title: automatic-partition-of-disks-in-Local-Storage-Operator
authors:
  - "@rohan47"
reviewers:
  - "@hekumar"
  - "@sapillai"
  - "@leseb"
  - "@travisn"
  - "@rohantmp"
  - "@jarrpa"
approvers:
  - "@hekumar"
creation-date: 2020-09-25
last-updated: 2020-09-25
status:
---

# Automatic partition of Disks in the Local-Storage-Operator

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

> This is a proposal to enable
> - automated partition of local devices via the `LocalVolumeSet` CR

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This is a proposal to enable automated partition of local devices via the `LocalVolumeSet` CR
```

> This CRD will be implemented in the LocalStorageOperator(LSO)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This functionality will be implemented in the local-storage-operator (LSO)
```

## Motivation

For performance reasons the user will want to use partitions.
On NVMe devices, some of the devices are capable of delevering very high IOPS per device. An OSD tends to bottleneck long before it reaches anywhere close to the device IOPS limit.

> So with single OSD per NVMe device, there will be a big gap between measured or advertised capabilities of these devices and what you can get with Ceph/OCS on top of them.

Reviewer 4: What is an "OSD"? Why does the LSO or even OpenShift care about these things?

What I'm saying is that you need to phrase this in a way that presents a broader use-case that is not specific to OCS.

### Goals

- Partition the selected devices based on the partition policy specified by the user.
- If a LocalVolumeSet has partitioning policy, it will create partitions on all disks.

### Non-Goals

- If anything changes later such as the parition policy changes or the device is resized, we won't go add or change any partitions.
- Policy for wiping device to clean the partitions
- Mixed method of PV creation is not supported. i.e., using some devices entirely and some with partitoins in a single LocalVolumeSet is not supported.

> ### Risks and Mitigations

Reviewer 2: Not sure I understand the point of the risks section. You are pointing out that we might partition the wrong disk if the user gives the wrong device filter? This risk doesn't seem any different from risks of the LocalVolumeSet already has, so maybe we can just refer back to that doc if it has a risks section.

- It will depend entirely on LocalVolumeSet. The device filtering for LocalVolumeSet is sufficient for a device to qualify for partitioning. So if a disk has been verified to be used, we will use it.

> - An undisired device can be selected by LocalVolumeSet device discovery which qualifies the device selection criteria specified by the user.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- An undesired device can be selected by LocalVolumeSet device discovery which qualifies the device selection criteria specified by the user.
```

## Proposal

The `local-storage-operator` is already capable of detecting local disks from the nodes and provisioning PVs out of them, but it can't partition them.
The idea is to introduce the feature of partitioning the local disks and using the partitions to provision the PVs.

> The administrator can specify if he wants to partition the disks in the LocalVolumeSet CR and the diskmaker, after detecting the disk, LSO will partition them first and then provision PVs on those partitions.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The administrator can specify if he wants to partition the disks in the LocalVolumeSet CR and the diskmaker, after detecting the disk, will partition them first before provisioning PVs on those partitions.
```

Reviewer 2: New sentence for the diskmaker, otherwise it sounds like the admin can configure the diskmaker.

#### Workflow of LocalPV creation after partitioning via LocalVolumeSet CR

The administrator can decide whether to run LSO discovery first to get a sense of available devices.

1. The admin decides they want to create partitions on some devices in the cluster
2. The admin creates a LocalVolumeSet CR that includes the partitioning policy
3. LSO reconciles the LocalVolumeSet CR (the same as designed for full devices)
4. On the node, LSO will examine the devices according to the settings in the LocalVolumeSet CR.
5. If there is a partition policy:
   - Create partitions according to the size in the policy for devices that match the device selection. The partition policy is very specific so the admin will get exactly the partitions desired.

>    - Create a PV for each partition

Reviewer 4: This entire section seems redundant given that you cover all these steps (and more) in a similar section below. Pick one to keep and remove the other.

## Design Details for Auto partitioning of local devices

Updated `LocalVolumeSet` API sceme for Auto partition:

```go

> type LocalVolumeSet struct {

Reviewer 2: No need to redefine this struct, it already exists.

	metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
	metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata"`
	Spec              LocalVolumeSetSpec   `json:"spec"`
	Status            LocalVolumeSetStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
}

> type LocalVolumeSetSpec struct {

Reviewer 2: How about just showing the new properties for the partitioning, and link to the original LocalVolumeSet doc for all the properties.

  // MinDeviceCount is the minumum number of devices that needs to be detected per node.
  // If the match devices are less than the minCount specified then no PVs will be created.
  // +optional
  MinDeviceCount *int32 `json:"minDeviceCount"`
  // Maximum number of Devices that needs to be detected per node.
  // +optional
  MaxDeviceCount *int32 `json:"maxDeviceCount"`
  // VolumeMode determines whether the PV created is Block or Filesystem. By default it will
  // be block
  // + optional
  VolumeMode PersistentVolumeMode `json:"volumeMode,omitempty"`
  // FSType type to create when volumeMode is Filesystem
  // +optional
  FSType string `json:"fsType,omitempty"`
  // If specified, a list of tolerations to pass to the discovery daemons.
  // +optional
  Tolerations []corev1.Toleration `json:"tolerations,omitempty"`
  // DeviceInclusionSpec is the filtration rule for including a device in the device discovery
  // +optional
  DeviceInclusionSpec *DeviceInclusionSpec `json:"deviceInclusionSpec"`
  
  // PartitioningSpec is the partitioning policy according to which the selected devices will be partitioned.
  PartitioningSpec PartitoiningSpec `json:"partitioningSpec"`
}

> type PartitoiningSpec struct {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
type PartitioningSpec struct {
```

  // PartSize determines the exact size of each partition.
  PartSize *resource.Quantity `json:"partSize"`
}

type LocalVolumeSetStatus struct {
  // Conditions is a list of conditions and their status.
  Conditions []operatorv1.OperatorCondition `json:"conditions,omitempty"`
  
  // TotalProvisionedDeviceCount is the count of the total devices over which the PVs has been provisioned
  TotalProvisionedDeviceCount *int32 `json:"totalProvisionedDeviceCount,omitempty"`
  
  // observedGeneration is the last generation change the operator has dealt with
  // +optional
  ObservedGeneration int64 `json:"observedGeneration,omitempty"`
  
  // TotalProvisionedPartitionCount is the count of the total partitions over which the PVs has been provisioned
  // This will be diffrent for TotalProvisionedDeviceCount as TotalProvisionedDeviceCount is
  //the count of the actual devices

>   TotalProvisionedPartitionCount *int32 `json:"totalProvisionedPartitionCount,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: How will this be updated? If each node updates the status, we could get conflicts. Was `totalProvisionedDeviceCount` implemented? It would have the same issue.

Author: `totalProvisionedDeviceCount` is implemented, looking into the implementation details.

Author: Okay, will remove this part.

  
  // PartitioningStatus will track the status of partitioning
  // Valid values are
  // nil : if there is no partitioningSpec
  // partitoining : if the partitioning is in progress
  // completed: when the partitioning of devices is completed

>   PartitioningStatus string `json:"partitioningStatus"`

Reviewer 2: We shouldn't need a special partitioning status. It's just an overall status for reconciling the LocalVolumeSet, whether devices or partitions.

}
```

> ### Workflow of `LocalPV` creation via `LocalVolumeSet CR`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Workflow for local PV creation via LocalVolumeSet CR
```

- Once the `LocalVolumeSet` is created, the controller will:
  - configure the local-static-provisioner to make a new StorageClass based on certain directories on the selected nodes.
  - assign diskmaker daemonset to the selected nodes.
  - there will be one daemonset for each `LocalVolumeSet` CR.
- The diskmaker daemon will find devices that match the disovery policy and check if partitoningSpec is present
  - if partitonSpec is present it will set PartitioningStatus to partitioning and will partition the devices.
  - as soon as a device is partitoned
    - the diskmaker will symlink the child partitions of the device into the directory that the local-static-provisioner is watching

>     - will set partitioningStatus to Completed once all the devices are partitioned

Reviewer 2: Only the operator should update the CR status, otherwise each of the nodes will conflict when they update the status.

- The localVolumeset won't accept changes after its created and has a partitioningSpec

> Example of `LocalVolumeSet` CR:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Example of LocalVolumeSet CR:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: local.storage.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: LocalVolumeSet
metadata:
  name: example-autodetect
spec:
  nodeSelector:
    nodeSelectorTerms:
      - matchExpressions:
          - key: kubernetes.io/hostname
            operator: In
            values:
              - worker-0
              - worker-1
  storageClassName: example-storageclass
  volumeMode: Block

>   minDeviceCount: 5

Reviewer 2: I thought we removed minDeviceCount

  maxDeviceCount: 10
  deviceInclusionSpec:
    deviceTypes:
      - RawDisk
    deviceMechanicalProperty:
      - Rotational
      - NonRotational
    minSize: 10G
    maxSize: 100G
  partitioningSpec:
    size: 30G
status:
  conditions:
  - lastTransitionTime: "2020-03-17T09:33:43Z"
    status: "True"
    type: Available
  totalProvisionedDeviceCount: 5
  totalProvisionedPartitionCount: 15
  partitioningStatus: completed
```

As per the above example the administrator wants partitions of size 30G.
Lets assume that there are 5 devices of 100G  that are detected and are fit for partitoning, so each device will be partitioned into 3 parts of 30G each and 10G of each device will remain unpartitioned.

> Right now we are keeping it simple by partitioning by size and will move to advanced partitioning policy in the further releases to avoid having unusable disk space.

Reviewer 2: I would think the admins would most often carve up the devices in sizes that make sense for their disks, so this may not even be a common issue. Sounds good for a future release though if it's common enough.
